Dept. of Health and Human Services
§ 164.520
that each is appropriately dated and
signed
in
accordance
with
§ 164.512(i)(2)(i) and (v).
(ii) Identity of public officials. A cov-
ered entity must rely, if such reliance is
reasonable under the circumstances, on
any of the following to verify identity
when the disclosure of protected health
information is to a public official or a
person acting on behalf of the public
official:
(A) If the request is made in person,
presentation of an agency identifica-
tion badge, other official credentials,
or other proof of government status;
(B) If the request is in writing, the
request is on the appropriate govern-
ment letterhead; or
(C) If the disclosure is to a person
acting on behalf of a public official, a
written statement on appropriate gov-
ernment letterhead that the person is
acting under the government’s author-
ity or other evidence or documentation
of agency, such as a contract for serv-
ices, memorandum of understanding, or
purchase order, that establishes that
the person is acting on behalf of the
public official.
(iii) Authority of public officials. A
covered entity should rely, if such reli-
ance is reasonable under the cir-
cumstances, on any of the following to
verify authority when the disclosure of
protected health information is to a
public official or a person acting on be-
half of the public official:
(A) A written statement of the legal
authority under which the information
is requested, or, if a written statement
would be impracticable, an oral state-
ment of such legal authority;
(B) If a request is made pursuant to
legal process, warrant, subpoena, order,
or other legal process issued by a grand
jury or a judicial or administrative tri-
bunal is presumed to constitute legal
authority.
(iv) Exercise of professional judgment.
The verification requirements of this
paragraph are met if the covered entity
relies on the exercise of professional
judgment in making a use or disclosure
in accordance with § 164.510 or acts on a
good faith belief in making a disclosure
in accordance with § 164.512(j).
[65 FR 82802, Dec. 28, 2000, as amended at 67
FR 53270, Aug. 14, 2002; 78 FR 5700, Jan. 25,
2013; 78 FR 34266, June 7, 2013]
§ 164.520 Notice of privacy practices
for protected health information.
(a) Standard: Notice of privacy prac-
tices—(1) Right to notice. Except as pro-
vided by paragraph (a)(3) or (4) of this
section, an individual has a right to
adequate notice of the uses and disclo-
sures of protected health information
that may be made by the covered enti-
ty, and of the individual’s rights and
the covered entity’s legal duties with
respect to protected health informa-
tion.
(2) Notice requirements for covered enti-
ties creating or maintaining records sub-
ject to 42 U.S.C. 290dd-2. As provided in
42 CFR 2.22, an individual who is the
subject of records protected under 42
CFR part 2 has a right to adequate no-
tice of the uses and disclosures of such
records, and of the individual’s rights
and the covered entity’s legal duties
with respect to such records.
(3) Exception for group health plans. (i)
An individual enrolled in a group
health plan has a right to notice:
(A) From the group health plan, if,
and to the extent that, such an indi-
vidual does not receive health benefits
under the group health plan through an
insurance contract with a health insur-
ance issuer or HMO;
(B) From the health insurance issuer
or HMO with respect to the group
health plan through which such indi-
viduals receive their health benefits
under the group health plan.
(ii) A group health plan that provides
health benefits solely through an in-
surance contract with a health insur-
ance issuer or HMO, and that creates
or receives protected health informa-
tion in addition to summary health in-
formation as defined in § 164.504(a) or
information on whether the individual
is participating in the group health
plan, or is enrolled in or has
disenrolled from a health insurance
issuer or HMO offered by the plan,
must:
(A) Maintain a notice under this sec-
tion; or
(B) Provide such notice upon request
to any person. The provisions of para-
graph (c)(1) of this section do not apply
to such group health plan.
(iii) A group health plan that pro-
vides health benefits solely through an
717§ 164.520
45 CFR Subtitle A (10–1–24 Edition)
insurance contract with a health insur-
ance issuer or HMO, and does not cre-
ate or receive protected health infor-
mation other than summary health in-
formation as defined in § 164.504(a) or
information on whether an individual
is participating in the group health
plan, or is enrolled in or has
disenrolled from a health insurance
issuer or HMO offered by the plan, is
not required to maintain or provide a
notice under this section.
(4) Exception for inmates. An inmate
does have a right to notice under
this section, and the requirements of
this section do not apply to a correc-
tional institution that is a covered en-
tity.
(b) Implementation specifications: Con-
tent of notice—(1) Required elements. The
covered entity, including any covered
entity
receiving
or
maintaining
records subject to 42 U.S.C. 290dd-2,
must provide a notice that is written
in plain language and that contains the
elements required by this paragraph.
(i) Header. The notice must contain
the following statement as a header or
otherwise prominently displayed:
‘‘THIS NOTICE DESCRIBES HOW MED-
ICAL INFORMATION ABOUT YOU MAY BE
USED AND DISCLOSED AND HOW YOU
CAN GET ACCESS TO THIS INFORMATION.
PLEASE REVIEW IT CAREFULLY.’’
(ii) Uses and disclosures. The notice
must contain:
(A) A description, including at least
one example, of the types of uses and
disclosures that the covered entity is
allowed by this subpart to make for
each of the following purposes: treat-
ment, payment, and health care oper-
ations.
(B) A description of each of the other
purposes for which the covered entity
is permitted or required by this sub-
part to use or disclose protected health
information without the individual’s
written authorization.
(C) If a use or disclosure for any pur-
pose
described
in
paragraphs
(b)(1)(ii)(A) or (B) of this section is pro-
hibited or materially limited by other
applicable law, such as 42 CFR part 2,
the description of such use or disclo-
sure must reflect the more stringent
law as defined in § 160.202 of this sub-
chapter.
(D) For each purpose described in
paragraph (b)(1)(ii)(A) or (B) of this
section, the description must include
sufficient detail to place the individual
on notice of the uses and disclosures
that are permitted or required by this
subpart and other applicable law, such
as 42 CFR part 2.
(E) A description of the types of uses
and disclosures that require an author-
ization under § 164.508(a)(2)–(a)(4), a
statement that other uses and disclo-
sures not described in the notice will
be made only with the individual’s
written authorization, and a statement
that the individual may revoke an au-
thorization
as
provided
by
§ 164.508(b)(5).
(F) A description, including at least
one example, of the types of uses and
disclosures
prohibited
under
§ 164.502(a)(5)(iii) in sufficient detail for
an individual to understand the prohi-
bition.
(G) A description, including at least
one example, of the types of uses and
disclosures for which an attestation is
required under § 164.509.
(H) A statement adequate to put the
individual on notice of the potential
for information disclosed pursuant to
this subpart to be subject to redisclo-
sure by the recipient and no longer pro-
tected by this subpart
(iii) Separate statements for certain
uses or disclosures. If the covered entity
intends to engage in any of the fol-
lowing activities, the description re-
quired by paragraph (b)(1)(ii)(A) or (B)
of this section must include a separate
statement informing the individual of
such activities, as applicable:
(A) In accordance with § 164.514(f)(1),
the covered entity may contact the in-
dividual to raise funds for the covered
entity and the individual has a right to
opt out of receiving such communica-
tions;
(B) In accordance with § 164.504(f), the
group health plan, or a health insur-
ance issuer or HMO with respect to a
group health plan, may disclose pro-
tected health information to the spon-
sor of the plan;
(C) If a covered entity that is a
health plan, excluding an issuer of a
long-term care policy falling within
paragraph (1)(viii) of the definition of
health plan, intends to use or disclose
718Dept. of Health and Human Services
§ 164.520
protected health information for un-
derwriting purposes, a statement that
the covered entity is prohibited from
using or disclosing protected health in-
formation that is genetic information
of an individual for such purposes;
(D) Substance use disorder treatment
records received from programs subject
to 42 CFR part 2, or testimony relaying
the content of such records, shall not
be used or disclosed in civil, criminal,
administrative, or legislative pro-
ceedings against the individual unless
based on written consent, or a court
order after notice and an opportunity
to be heard is provided to the indi-
vidual or the holder of the record, as
provided in 42 CFR part 2. A court
order authorizing use or disclosure
must be accompanied by a subpoena or
other legal requirement compelling
disclosure before the requested record
is used or disclosed; or
(E) If a covered entity that creates or
maintains records subject to 42 CFR
part 2 intends to use or disclose such
records for fundraising for the benefit
of the covered entity, the individual
must first be provided with a clear and
conspicuous opportunity to elect not to
receive any fundraising communica-
tions.
(iv) Individual rights. The notice must
contain a statement of the individual’s
rights with respect to protected health
information and a brief description of
how the individual may exercise these
rights, as follows:
(A) The right to request restrictions
on certain uses and disclosures of pro-
tected health information as provided
by § 164.522(a), including a statement
that the covered entity is not required
to agree to a requested restriction, ex-
cept in case of a disclosure restricted
under § 164.522(a)(1)(vi);
(B) The right to receive confidential
communications of protected health
information as provided by § 164.522(b),
as applicable;
(C) The right to inspect and copy pro-
tected health information as provided
by § 164.524;
(D) The right to amend protected
health information as provided by
§ 164.526;
(E) The right to receive an account-
ing of disclosures of protected health
information as provided by § 164.528;
and
(F) The right of an individual, includ-
ing an individual who has agreed to re-
ceive the notice electronically in ac-
cordance with paragraph (c)(3) of this
section, to obtain a paper copy of the
notice from the covered entity upon re-
quest.
(v) Covered entity’s duties. The notice
must contain:
(A) A statement that the covered en-
tity is required by law to maintain the
privacy of protected health informa-
tion, to provide individuals with notice
of its legal duties and privacy prac-
tices, and to notify affected individuals
following a breach of unsecured pro-
tected health information;
(B) A statement that the covered en-
tity is not required to abide by the terms
of the notice currently in effect; and
(C) For the covered entity to apply a
change in a privacy practice that is de-
scribed in the notice to protected
health information that the covered
entity created or received prior to
issuing a revised notice, in accordance
with § 164.530(i)(2)(ii), a statement that
it reserves the right to change the
terms of its notice and to make the
new notice provisions effective for all
protected health information that it
maintains. The statement must also
describe how it will provide individuals
with a revised notice.
(vi) Complaints. The notice must con-
tain a statement that individuals may
complain to the covered entity and to
the Secretary if they believe their pri-
vacy rights have been violated, a brief
description of how the individual may
file a complaint with the covered enti-
ty, and a statement that the individual
will be retaliated against for filing
a complaint.
(vii) Contact. The notice must con-
tain the name, or title, and telephone
number of a person or office to contact
for further information as required by
§ 164.530(a)(1)(ii).
(viii) Effective date. The notice must
contain the date on which the notice is
first in effect, which may not be earlier
than the date on which the notice is
printed or otherwise published.
(2) Optional elements. (i) In addition to
the information required by paragraph
(b)(1) of this section, if a covered entity
719§ 164.520
45 CFR Subtitle A (10–1–24 Edition)
elects to limit the uses or disclosures
that it is permitted to make under this
subpart, the covered entity may de-
scribe its more limited uses or disclo-
sures in its notice, provided that the
covered entity may not include in its
notice a limitation affecting its right
to make a use or disclosure that is re-
quired by law or permitted by
§ 164.512(j)(1)(i).
(ii) For the covered entity to apply a
change in its more limited uses and
disclosures to protected health infor-
mation created or received prior to
issuing a revised notice, in accordance
with § 164.530(i)(2)(ii), the notice must
include the statements required by
paragraph (b)(1)(v)(C) of this section.
(3) Revisions to the notice. The covered
entity must promptly revise and dis-
tribute its notice whenever there is a
material change to the uses or disclo-
sures, the individual’s rights, the cov-
ered entity’s legal duties, or other pri-
vacy practices stated in the notice. Ex-
cept when required by law, a material
change to any term of the notice may
not be implemented prior to the effec-
tive date of the notice in which such
material change is reflected.
(c) Implementation specifications: Pro-
vision of notice. A covered entity must
make the notice required by this sec-
tion available on request to any person
and to individuals as specified in para-
graphs (c)(1) through (c)(3) of this sec-
tion, as applicable.
(1) Specific requirements for health
plans. (i) A health plan must provide
the notice:
(A) No later than the compliance
date for the health plan, to individuals
then covered by the plan;
(B) Thereafter, at the time of enroll-
ment, to individuals who are new en-
rollees.
(ii) No less frequently than once
every three years, the health plan must
notify individuals then covered by the
plan of the availability of the notice
and how to obtain the notice.
(iii) The health plan satisfies the re-
quirements of paragraph (c)(1) of this
section if notice is provided to the
named insured of a policy under which
coverage is provided to the named in-
sured and one or more dependents.
(iv) If a health plan has more than
one notice, it satisfies the require-
ments of paragraph (c)(1) of this sec-
tion by providing the notice that is rel-
evant to the individual or other person
requesting the notice.
(v) If there is a material change to
the notice:
(A) A health plan that posts its no-
tice on its web site in accordance with
paragraph (c)(3)(i) of this section must
prominently post the change or its re-
vised notice on its web site by the ef-
fective date of the material change to
the notice, and provide the revised no-
tice, or information about the material
change and how to obtain the revised
notice, in its next annual mailing to
individuals then covered by the plan.
(B) A health plan that does not post
its notice on a web site pursuant to
paragraph (c)(3)(i) of this section must
provide the revised notice, or informa-
tion about the material change and
how to obtain the revised notice, to in-
dividuals then covered by the plan
within 60 days of the material revision
to the notice.
(2) Specific requirements for certain cov-
ered health care providers. A covered
health care provider that has a direct
treatment relationship with an indi-
vidual must:
(i) Provide the notice:
(A) No later than the date of the first
service delivery, including service de-
livered electronically, to such indi-
vidual after the compliance date for
the covered health care provider; or
(B) In an emergency treatment situa-
tion, as soon as reasonably practicable
after the emergency treatment situa-
tion.
(ii) Except in an emergency treat-
ment situation, make a good faith ef-
fort to obtain a written acknowledg-
ment of receipt of the notice provided
in accordance with paragraph (c)(2)(i)
of this section, and if not obtained,
document its good faith efforts to ob-
tain such acknowledgment and the rea-
son why the acknowledgment was not
obtained;
(iii) If the covered health care pro-
vider maintains a physical service de-
livery site:
(A) Have the notice available at the
service delivery site for individuals to
request to take with them; and
720Dept. of Health and Human Services
§ 164.520
(B) Post the notice in a clear and
prominent location where it is reason-
able to expect individuals seeking serv-
ice from the covered health care pro-
vider to be able to read the notice; and
(iv) Whenever the notice is revised,
make the notice available upon request
on or after the effective date of the re-
vision and promptly comply with the
requirements of paragraph (c)(2)(iii) of
this section, if applicable.
(3) Specific requirements for electronic
notice. (i) A covered entity that main-
tains a web site that provides informa-
tion about the covered entity’s cus-
tomer services or benefits must promi-
nently post its notice on the web site
and make the notice available elec-
tronically through the web site.
(ii) A covered entity may provide the
notice required by this section to an
individual by e-mail, if the individual
agrees to electronic notice and such
agreement has not been withdrawn. If
the covered entity knows that the e-
mail transmission has failed, a paper
copy of the notice must be provided to
the individual. Provision of electronic
notice by the covered entity will sat-
isfy the provision requirements of
paragraph (c) of this section when
timely made in accordance with para-
graph (c)(1) or (2) of this section.
(iii) For purposes of paragraph
(c)(2)(i) of this section, if the first serv-
ice delivery to an individual is deliv-
ered electronically, the covered health
care provider must provide electronic
notice automatically and contempora-
neously in response to the individual’s
first request for service. The require-
ments in paragraph (c)(2)(ii) of this sec-
tion apply to electronic notice.
(iv) The individual who is the recipi-
ent of electronic notice retains the
right to obtain a paper copy of the no-
tice from a covered entity upon re-
quest.
(d) Implementation specifications: Joint
notice by separate covered entities. Cov-
ered entities that participate in orga-
nized health care arrangements may
comply with this section by a joint no-
tice, provided that:
(1) The covered entities participating
in the organized health care arrange-
ment agree to abide by the terms of the
notice with respect to protected health
information created or received by the
covered entity as part of its participa-
tion in the organized health care ar-
rangement;
(2) The joint notice meets the imple-
mentation specifications in paragraph
(b) of this section, except that the
statements required by this section
may be altered to reflect the fact that
the notice covers more than one cov-
ered entity; and
(i) Describes with reasonable speci-
ficity the covered entities, or class of
entities, to which the joint notice ap-
plies;
(ii) Describes with reasonable speci-
ficity the service delivery sites, or
classes of service delivery sites, to
which the joint notice applies; and
(iii) If applicable, states that the cov-
ered entities participating in the orga-
nized health care arrangement will
share protected health information
with each other, as necessary to carry
out treatment, payment, or health care
operations relating to the organized
health care arrangement.
(3) The covered entities included in
the joint notice must provide the no-
tice to individuals in accordance with
the applicable implementation speci-
fications of paragraph (c) of this sec-
tion. Provision of the joint notice to an
individual by any one of the covered
entities included in the joint notice
will satisfy the provision requirement
of paragraph (c) of this section with re-
spect to all others covered by the joint
notice.
(4) The permission in paragraph (d) of
this section for covered entities that
participate in an organized health care
arrangement to issue a joint notice
may not be construed to remove any
obligations or duties of entities cre-
ating or maintaining records subject to
42 U.S.C. 290dd-2, or to remove any
rights of patients who are the subjects
of such records.
(e) Implementation specifications: Docu-
mentation. A covered entity must docu-
ment compliance with the notice re-
quirements, as required by § 164.530(j),
by retaining copies of the notices
issued by the covered entity and, if ap-
plicable, any written acknowledgments
of receipt of the notice or documenta-
tion of good faith efforts to obtain such
